EDM-1852: Support for external PostgreSQL Database (#1591)
flightctl/flightctl: docs/user/external-database.md

GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE flightctl TO flightctl_migrator;

-- Grant schema privileges
GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA public TO flightctl_app;
GRANT USAGE, CREATE ON SCHEMA public TO flightctl_migrator;
GRANT CREATE ON DATABASE flightctl TO flightctl_migrator;
GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO flightctl_migrator WITH GRANT OPTION;

-- Set up automatic permissions for future tables
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA public 
  GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON TABLES TO flightctl_app;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA public 
  GRANT USAGE, SELECT ON SEQUENCES TO flightctl_app;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA public
    GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON TABLES TO flightctl_migrator WITH GRANT OPTION;
```

### 2. Configure SSL (Recommended)

For production deployments, enable SSL on your PostgreSQL instance and configure appropriate connection security.

## Deployment Configuration

### Kubernetes (Helm)

#### 1. Update values.yaml

```yaml
db:
  external: "enabled"
  hostname: "your-postgres-hostname.example.com"
  port: 5432
  name: flightctl
  user: flightctl_app
  migrationUser: flightctl_migrator
  # Set passwords via secrets or values

>   userPassword: "your_app_password"

Reviewer: It will  become visible with `helm get values flightctl` - is it OK? Especially if we are talking about an external database

Reviewer 2: What’s the alternative you have in mind? As I see it, either we accept that visibility, or we move the secrets outside of Helm (and then we can’t do a pure helm install).

Author: Here is the jira card to do it. It's in the same feature. Let's not complicate the PR. (Approved by Avishay)
[EDM-2145](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/EDM-2145) [DEV] Use native Kubernetes Secrets for all DB parameters

Reviewer: The secrets are auto-generated by helm if not set. So maybe we shouldn't be allowing setting them via values?

# Configuring External PostgreSQL Database

> FlightCtl supports using an external PostgreSQL database instead of the built-in database deployment. This is useful for large enterprise customers often have strict security policies covering all database components, production environments where you want to manage your database separately or use a managed database service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flight Control supports using an external PostgreSQL database instead of the built-in database deployment. This is useful for using an existing database, implementing specific security policies or high availability, or using a managed database service.
```

Reviewer 2: Replace flightctl with Flight Control for all intances when refering to the project, unless it's the CLI or service like flightctl-api

Author: > Replace flightctl with Flight Control 

replaced

> We usually have "enabled: ". Would it make sense to use this, and then if the db isn't enabled then we know it's external?

`enabled: false` doesn't not associates with `external` straightforward. Also in both cases the `db:` part is required, which makes `enabled: false` even more problematic. I see this `external` as a flag, the same as `type`. Maybe to change it to `internal` and to make it true/false.

> Doesn't this just call ./deploy/scripts/wait-for-database.sh, which tries to connect to the DB?
1. As discussed on the design meeting, we're expecting this DB to exist and to be ready, so there is no need to wait for it to be ready.
2. This script is in a `Containerfile.db-setup`, which doesn't run for external DB.

### Podman Quadlet

#### 1. Update service-config.yaml

Edit `/etc/flightctl/service-config.yaml` and add or update the `db:` section:

```yaml
db:
  external: "enabled"
  hostname: "your-postgres-hostname.example.com"
  port: 5432
  name: flightctl
  user: flightctl_app
  migrationUser: flightctl_migrator
```

**Note**: The `service-config.yaml` file is always required for quadlet deployments (for baseDomain, auth settings, etc.). For internal database deployments, the `db:` section can be omitted entirely or set to `external: "disabled"`.

#### 2. Set up secrets

```bash
# Create password secrets
echo "your_app_password" | podman secret create flightctl-postgresql-user-password -
echo "your_migration_password" | podman secret create flightctl-postgresql-migrator-password -
# Optional: only needed if FlightCtl should create users automatically
echo "your_admin_password" | podman secret create flightctl-postgresql-master-password -
```

#### 3. Deploy

The quadlet deployment automatically detects external database configuration:

```bash
# Deploy FlightCtl (will automatically use external database based on service-config.yaml)

> make deploy-quadlets

Author: updated

   ```

### Permission Issues

If you see permission errors, ensure:

1. The migration user has CREATE privileges on the database and schema
2. The application user has appropriate data access privileges
3. The admin user can create other users

### SSL/TLS Issues

For SSL connections, you may need to:

1. Add SSL configuration to the database connection string
2. Mount SSL certificates in your containers
3. Configure `sslmode`, `sslcert`, `sslkey`, and `sslrootcert` parameters

## Security Considerations

1. **Use strong passwords** for all database users
2. **Enable SSL/TLS** for database connections in production
3. **Restrict network access** to your database instance
4. **Use secrets management** instead of plain-text passwords in configuration
5. **Regular backup** your external database
6. **Monitor database performance** and set up appropriate alerts

## Backup and Recovery

When using an external database, you are responsible for:

1. **Database backups**: Set up regular automated backups
2. **Point-in-time recovery**: Configure WAL archiving if needed
3. **High availability**: Configure replication or clustering
4. **Monitoring**: Set up database monitoring and alerting

> FlightCtl does not manage backups for external databases.

Reviewer 2: This is true for the internal DB as well - remove

Author: removed
